CHAPTER FOURTEEN

The Future of Artificial Intelligence
David A. Bray

“AI can match humans into different ad-hoc teams…to fit a specific 
public service goal or problem set. If an emergent event or crisis 
occurs, AI can help identify who is available to assist with what 
activities—and even help coordinate swarming activities of both 
humans and machines to assist with the response to the event. AI 
can learn which humans work better on specific tasks with other 
humans…”


Imagine being able to visit a disability claims office in a digital environment. 
Imagine a patent examiner equipped with digital assistants that could do the 
bulk of administrative work behind processing patents. Artificial intelligence 
(AI) may make both of these scenarios a reality. This chapter addresses the 
question of how advances in and adoption of AI will transform public service 
over the next twenty years. AI has dual meanings: 
•	 artificial intelligence 
•	 augmented intelligence, specifically how human capabilities can be 

improved by pairing them with machines to collectively work smarter 

Most of the benefits to government will come from a people-centered 
approach of pairing humans with machine learning to amplify human strengths 
via augmented intelligence. Such a people-centered approach means that the 
success of public service in the future depends on identifying beneficial ways 
to augment the extant human abilities of networked, cross-sector teams—
who want to improve the delivery of public service—with digital assistants 
and learning machines to amplify the team’s strengths, mitigate any possible 
blind spots, and increase the capabilities of the team as a whole. 

This chapter breaks down the possibilities into the near-term future 
(2020-2025), the medium-term future (2025-2030), and the long-term 
future (2030-2040), and then focuses on specific initiatives that are likely to 
be launched to employ AI to transform the public sector. 

The Near-Term Future (2020-2025)

The near-term future includes using AI in specialized applications to 
support the information and logistics functions traditionally performed by 
government to provide government services. It is important to note that 
when deciding where to use AI, public servants determine to what degree 
the machines providing this assistance operate autonomously vs. semi-auton-
omously.1 For the near future, most machines will probably provide support 
that still requires a human to act or make a decision. 

For all the near-term future possibilities discussed below, government 
should implement “public review boards” that look at the diversity, consis-
tency, and appropriateness of the data used. Without diverse or consistent 
data, the AI trained by the data may make decisions that erode public trust. 
Without appropriate use of data, public trust may also erode. For represen-
tative government, using “public review boards” in a form akin to a random 
jury selection process may be one way to ensure improved oversight. Such 




activities would also involve outreach efforts by public service organizations, 
to increase digital literacy and the understanding of AI and what it can do. 
Following are some examples of how AI will be deployed in the near future. 

Increased Use of AI-Supported Assistance for Individuals Seeking 
Government Information. Several cities already have “311” telephone lines 
and mobile apps to assist individuals with non-emergency city services as well 
as to provide information on programs, events, and activities in the city. Such 
public-facing services will employ AI to help individuals with their questions. 
Humans would still need to be in the loop for new questions where the AI 
does not know the answer, or instances where the AI is uncertain about the 
question being asked. Such AI assistance will also help government employ-
ees with questions about onboarding, starting a new role, help with an exist-
ing role, retiring, and other internal service queries. 

Increased Use of AI-Supported Assistance for Talent Management and 
Skills Matching. AI will help community members find new jobs and tailor 
training to hone and improve their skills for upward mobility in their jobs. 
Unemployment and career assistance services will provide an AI assistant via 
phone or at a physical career support center. The AI assistant will serve as a 
personal scout for new jobs based on questions answered by the individual 
about their skills, abilities, and desired work. The AI assistant will also help 
with tailored training opportunities accessible through in-person community 
colleges or online. Such AI assistance for talent management and skills match-
ing will also be employed internally to government itself, to help the existing 
government workforce find new work opportunities and tailor individual train-
ing to further develop skills and abilities. 

Increased Use of AI-Supported Review of Public Applications and 
Filings. Current government functions often entail detailed forms and pro-
cesses to either prove or approve services to the public. Such functions 
include licenses, land and jurisdictional approvals, individual claims, payment 
processing, and travel-related documents. The current linear process of such 
applications is outdated, usually requiring a human to identify the right form, 
fill it out, and submit it—only to find that another form was needed or more 
information was required. Instead, AI assistants will provide more tailored 
support to individuals, to better understand what they are applying for and 
pre-review a public application or filing prior to human approval. 

Increased Use of AI-Supported Legal, Financial and Ethics Reviews. 
Legal, financial, and ethics reviews often entail a rules-based approach of 
reviewing information submitted to ensure it comports with specified require-
ments. Such reviews fit well with how AI can assist humans. An AI assistant 
will do the initial review, let an individual know if more information is required, 
and provide a preliminary result for final review by a human. 

Increased Use of AI-Supported Detection of Fake Images, Videos, and 
Audio Files. It currently is possible to “clone” someone’s face to an image 
or video of someone else’s body. Voices also can be “cloned” to produce 
audio recordings that sound like someone saying something they did not say. 

